---
layout: post
title: Data pipelines with Prefect
---

## What are data pipelines?

My first day at my first job involved overlooking 1200 hatchback cars in a shed. I had been told that all of them were made in the last 3 days and were ready for dispatch. It was at this instance the true marvel of what Henry Ford had achieved in 1913 with the first moving assembly line had sunk in. Not only did he cut down the production time for each vehicle from 12 hours to about 93 minutes but also streamlined the entire process. The role of assembly lines is a perfect analogy for Data pipelines.

Data being the modern day oil makes Data flow one of the most critical operations in todays data-driven world. Unfortunately, data flow is precarious for a number of reasons: data can be corrupt, data sources may conflict, data maybe inconsistant across sources and actually having updated data. Even if we had the data ready we would have to transform it into our required format. Lastly, any person to have ever written code will know its great when script run fine but more often then not they will fail. 

Data pipelines aims at addressing all the pitfalls mentioned above. It is software than eliminates manual steps and enables automated flow of data from one station to the next. It address the what where how and when for each station. It automates the processes of extracting, transforming, combining, validating, and loading data. Additionally it can process multiple streams at once along with [state handling] (https://docs.prefect.io/core/concepts/notifications.html)

## Prefect: A modern data workflow engine

Prefect is a great data automation tool that can help designing, building, testing and running powerful data applications. Apache airflow has been a front runner in workflow orchestration tooling space but the inception of prefect has been to address the short comings of airflow. For anyone familar with airflow [this article] (https://medium.com/the-prefect-blog/why-not-airflow-4cfa423299c4) can providing a compelling reason to give prefect a shot.


## Exploring Prefect features with a working example:

#### Install prefect:
Prefect consists of several components where many can be used optionally. The central component is Prefect Core which is the basic framework to define flows and tasks including the possibility to run them locally. It is available in PyPI as a pip package and can be installed like the following into a virtual environment or globally.

'''
pip install prefect
'''

#### Example:
